In this section,
we will take a look at the core concepts
of a Linux operating system.
We will start with the Linux Kernel,
understand what it is
and why it's important.
We will then learn about the Kernel
and userspace.
Next,
we will look at how Linux works
with the hardware resources
available to the system
and how to make use of Kernel modules.
This is followed by a hands-on lab exercise.
After this,
we will check out a simplified overview
of the boot process in Linux,
learn about the different types
of run levels.
We will wrap up this section
understanding the different file types
in Linux
and the file system hierarchy.
If you have worked with any operating system,
you are likely to have run
into the term Kernel,
so what is a Kernel?
Kernel is the major component
of an operating system
and is the core interface
between a computer's hardware
and its processes.
It communicates
between the two managing resources
as efficiently as possible.
To understand a Kernel in simple terms,
let us use an analogy.
One of the best ones I have come across
is an analogy of a college library.
This library has several resources
at its disposal;
books,
study guides,
reference materials,
fictional and nonfictional books,
DVDs,
blu-rays,
and workstations for students,
to name a few.
These resources, however,
are limited in number.
The resources are used
by the college students.
The person in charge of the library
and a key member of this system
is, of course, the librarian.
Let us for a minute assume a scenario
where there was no librarian.
We may have a handful of students
searching through every nook
and corner of the library,
borrowing whatever materials
they can lay their hands on,
there would be no track of who borrowed what
and when a material is due to be returned.
The books may not be returned
back to the library by the due date.
This mismanaged system
could also mean that the resources
may not be available
for other students when they really need it.
Enter the librarian,
who ensures that students only get books
according to the year they are in
limiting one book per student.
The librarian keeps track
of all the books borrowed
and when they are due.
The librarian also sends notifications
to the students before the due date
and make sure
the resources are returned back
so that they can be used
by other students subsequently.
The library in this analogy is comparable
to a computer operating system.
The books,
reference materials,
and other resources in this analogy
are equivalent to hardware resources,
the students are the application processes,
the librarian in this example
is equivalent to a Linux Kernel.
The Kernel is responsible
for four major tasks.
Memory management
keep track of how much memory
is used to store what and where.
Process management
determine which processes can use the CPU
when, and for how long.
Device drivers
act as a mediator
or an interpreter
between the hardware and processes.
System calls and security
receive requests for service
from the processes.
The Linux Kernel is monolithic.
This means that the Kernel
carries out CPU scheduling,
memory management,
and several other operations by itself.
The Kernel is also modular,
which means it can extend its capabilities
through the use
of dynamically loaded Kernel modules.
Let us now look at ways
to identify the Linux Kernel version
and understand the naming conventions.
The Kernel is an integral part
of the operating system.
Use the Uname command
to display information about the Kernel.
By itself,
it does not provide much information
except that the system uses a Linux Kernel.
Use the dash R or dash A flag
to print the Kernel version.
Here you will see that this operating system
is running a Kernel version
of 4.15.0-72-generic.
Here, 4 stands for the Linux Kernel version,
15 is the major version,
0, the minor version,
72, the patch level,
and finally,
generic is the Linux distro
specific additional information.
The first Linux Kernel was developed
by Linus Torvalds in 1991.
The latest release as of this recording
is version 5.5.10,
which was released on the 18th of March 2020.
All Linux distributions
make use of any one
of these versions of Kernel.
For example,
Ubuntu 20.04,
which was released in April 2020
uses the Linux Kernel 5 out of the box.
If you are interested to learn more,
check out kernel.org.
This is an open-source project
that hosts the repositories
that make all versions of the Kernel
source code available to all users.
One of the important functions
of the Linux Kernel
is memory management.
We will now see how memory
is separated within the Linux Kernel.
Memory is divided into two areas
known as Kernel space and userspace.
These are synonymous
to the terms Kernel and user mode.
Kernel space is the portion of memory
in which the Kernel executes
and provides its services.
A process running in the Kernel space
has unrestricted access to the hardware.
As such, it is strictly reserved
for running the Kernel code,
Kernel extensions,
and most device drivers.
Going back to our analogy
where the Kernel is compared
to the librarian,
Kernel space can be compared
to a section of the library
that only the librarian or administrators
of the library have access to.
These sections contain books
and other reference materials.
On the other hand,
all processes running outside the Kernel
reside in the user space
which has restricted access
to CPU and memory.
Most Unix-like operating systems,
including Linux,
come prepackaged
with all kinds of utilities
programming languages,
and graphical tools.
These are called user-space applications.
This is also often referred to
as the Userland.
The Userland is comparable to areas
designated for normal students
to read the books
and make use of other reference materials.
Examples of user-space applications
include programs that are written in C,
Java,
Python, Ruby,
or any other programming language.
Let us now look at how programs
running in the user space work.
All user programs function
by manipulating data,
but where does this data live?
Most commonly,
it is stored in memory and on disk.
User programs get access to data
by making special requests
to the Kernel called system calls.
Examples include allocating memory
by using variables or opening a file.
If we compare this to our analogy,
students must make requests
to the librarian
to borrow specific books
from certain sections of the library.
The books would only be issued
once the librarian approves it.
For example,
opening a file such as the /etc/os-release file
to see the version
of the operating system installed
results in a system call.
Here, the opens the file
specified by pathname.
The file is located in the /etc directory
which is mounted on a file system
created on a block device.
Examples of other common system calls are
close,
get PID,
read directory,
string length,
and close directory.